README.md, before:

RoboFab
=======
RoboFab is a Python library with objects that deal with data usually associated with fonts and type design. RoboFab has support for the [UFO font format](http://unifiedfontobject.org).


###The Developers

RoboFab is developed and maintained by Tal Leming, Erik van Blokland, Just van Rossum (in no particular order)

###Contact

Email the RoboFab Consortium at 
i n f o (at) r o b o f a b (dot) o r g

###Copyrights

This package is distributed under the BSD license. See the [license](LICENSE.txt). RoboFab is built in [Python](http://www.python.org). Parts of RoboFab use [fontTools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/fonttools/), an OpenSource font toolkit by Just van Rossum. Parts of the RoboFab library are built to work with code from [FontLab](http://www.fontlab.com), which is a product of Pyrus Inc. Parts of RoboFab implement the Property List file format in XML, copyright [Apple Computer](http://www.apple.com). Parts of RoboFab implement tables and names from PostScript and the OpenType FDK, copyright [Adobe](http://www.adobe.com).

Commit message:

Adding links to the new documentation location

README.md, after:

RoboFab
=======
RoboFab is a Python library with objects that deal with data usually associated with fonts and type design. RoboFab has support for the [UFO font format](http://unifiedfontobject.org).

###Documentation

Documentation for RoboFab lives at [RoboDocs]:http://www.robodocs.info/roboFabDocs/source/index.html
Some How Tos and older documentation can be found at RoboFab.com:[http://robofab.com]

###The Developers

RoboFab is developed and maintained by Tal Leming, Erik van Blokland, Just van Rossum (in no particular order)

###Contact

Email the RoboFab Consortium at 
i n f o (at) r o b o f a b (dot) o r g

###Copyrights

This package is distributed under the BSD license. See the [license](LICENSE.txt). RoboFab is built in [Python](http://www.python.org). Parts of RoboFab use [fontTools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/fonttools/), an OpenSource font toolkit by Just van Rossum. Parts of the RoboFab library are built to work with code from [FontLab](http://www.fontlab.com), which is a product of Pyrus Inc. Parts of RoboFab implement the Property List file format in XML, copyright [Apple Computer](http://www.apple.com). Parts of RoboFab implement tables and names from PostScript and the OpenType FDK, copyright [Adobe](http://www.adobe.com).
